# Implementation of a Machine Learning algorithm for re-designing synthetic DNA using Codon Optimisation

## Abstract
Synthetic Biology has made significant progress in the areas of DNA sequencing and synthesis. Construction of synthetic genetic circuits has been automated through use of various toolkits that support integration of biological parts. The parts differ in nucleotide sequence across organisms, thereby hindering expression of foreign genes in the host organism. In this project we aim at analysing the patterns in Yeast protein coding sequences that can be used to alter the foreign gene without affecting the underlying amino acid sequence. The redesigned sequence can perhaps enhance the expression of foreign gene in the host organism. We treat DNA sequences analogous to the sentences in a natural language. Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques are applied to study the codon usage patterns in Yeast genome that can be used to find optimal protein coding sequences for the heterologous genes through codon optimisation. The results show an impressive accuracy of over 90% in predicting the codons, while the underlying amino acid sequence of the protein molecule remains unaffected.

## Source of Data
In our study, we have used genomic data of a popular fungi known as Saccharomyces cerevisiae or the budding yeast. It is widely used as a host organism for expressing heterologous proteins due to the presence of a plasmid in its cell. The genomic data for Yeast protein coding sequences was obtained from a community known as Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD). The community maintains a collection of genomic data of budding yeast such as genes, proteins, and other related features. The data can be found at http://sgd-archive.yeastgenome.org/sequence/S288C_reference/orf_dna/orf_coding_all.fasta.gz.

## Methodology
We used sequence-to-sequence model for analysing the usage patterns of amino acids and the corresponding synonymous codons in the Yeast genome to alter heterologous genes for improving their expression levels in the host organism. Given a sequence of amino acids for a known protein molecule as an input, the model predicts a sequence of corresponding synonymous codons without affecting the underlying sequence of amino acids. A bi-directional LSTM network was used for sequence analysis and generation. Embedding layer was used for extracting features for individual amino acids and codons based on the context in which they appear.
